Clique Block Choice Rule (#3436)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-3436.md

---
eip: 3436
title: Expanded Clique Block Choice Rule
author: Danno Ferrin (@shemnon)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-3436-expanded-clique-block-choice-rule/5809
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Networking
created: 2021-03-25
requires: 225
---

## Simple Summary

Add a four step block rule to Clique that should reduce block production deadlocks

## Abstract

The current specification of Clique allows for multiple competing blocks from producers but does not
provide any strategies to pick blocks aside from the current "highest total difficulty" rule. This
EIP proposes a four step choice rule of highest total difficulty, shortest chain, most recently
in-turn, and lowest hash. This would prevent deadlocks that have occurred in production systems.

## Motivation

> Recently (5 March 2021) there were a couple of deadlocks in the Goerli multi-client Clique network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There has been more than one deadlock in the Goerli multi-client Clique network.
```

state of the chain was in one of two configurations of 8 validators that can result in a chain halt.
Three of the four clients observed a choice sequence of lowest total difficulty followed by first
observed block. Geth added one extra rule of preferring the shortest chain before preferring the
first observed block. This fork would have resolved itself with Geth's rule, but there is still a
configuration where the chain can halt with a shortest chain rule.

## Specification

When a Click validator is choosing between two different chain head blocks to build a nre proposed
block they should chose the blocks from the following priority list.

1. Choose the block with the most total difficulty.
2. Then choose the block with the lowest block number.
3. Then choose the block that has had the least recent in-turn slot.
4. Then choose the block with the lowest hash.

When resolving rule 3 clients should use the following formula, where `Vi` is the integer index of
the validator that signed the block when sorted as per epoch checkpointing, `Hn` is the number of
the header, and `Vt` is the count of the current validators. Clients should choose the block with
the **smallest** value.

```

> (Hn - Vi) % Vt

Reviewer: Recommend human readable variable names rather than single or double letter names:
```suggestion
(header_number - validator_index) % validator_count
```

implicitly prefers the chain with more in-order blocks. When selecting between competing out of
order chains the validator who is closest to producing an in-order block in the future should have
their chain declined so that they are available to produce an in-order block sooner.

At least one client has been observed producing multiple blocks at the same height with the same
difficulty, so a final catch-all standard of lowest block hash should break any remaining ties.

## Backwards Compatibility

The current block choice rules are a mix of most total difficulty and most total difficulty plus
shortest chain.

As long as the majority of the active validators implement the block choice rules then a client who
only implements the existing difficulty based rule will eventually align with the chain preferred by
these rules. If less than a majority implement these rules then deadlocks can still occur, and
depend on the first observation of problematic blocks, which is no worse than the current situation.

If clients only partially implement the rule as long as every higher ranked rule is also implemented
then the situation will be no worse than today.

## Reference Implementation

> Implementation in Hyperledger Besu: https://github.com/hyperledger/besu/pull/2084

Reviewer: Reference implementation should either be inline, in `../assets/eip-3436` or the entire section can be left out (it is optional).  EIPs are not an appropriate place for lists of things or external links to third party repositories.
